About the Archive
This is a digitized version of an article from The Times’s print archive, before the start of online publication in 1996. To preserve these articles as they originally appeared, The Times does not alter, edit or update them.
Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors or other problems; we are continuing to work to improve these archived versions.

In today's age of electric typewriters and computerized typesetting, the idea of people glorifying the art of writing by using pen and ink to form handwritten letters and words in the manner of the early scribes seems like an anachronism. Yet calligraphy, which means “beautiful writing,” is being practiced by surprising numbers of people‐all throughout the contry.

Classes in calligraphy are now available in many areas, in community centers, adult education programs, and in such instruction centers as the Calligraphy Workshop, 80 Fifth Avenue; the New School loft at 12 West 13th Street; the Craft Students League, 610 Lexington Avenue, and the Art Students League. 215 West 57th Street (all in Manhattan).

Why the interest in calligraphy? “It's fashionable,” comments professional calligrapher Alice Koeth, whose work often is seen at the Morgan Library among other places. Although she approves of the growing interest, she has reservations. “Everyone is italic hand crazy,” she says, “and people say ‘I do calligraphy’ when what they're really doing is often no more than a had Italic hand written with a broad edged pen.”

While many people equate Italic writing with the word “calligraphy,” the skill goes far beyond that to include such decorative hands as Roman, Black litter or Gothic (more commonly identified as Old English), 18th century English Roundhand or Copperplate (known for its graceful swirls of thick and thin curling lines), and many other hands from varied places and periods.

Nonetheless Italic still seems to hold the greatest appeal for many people—and that is the reason businessman Wallace Weinstein, fo example, enrolled in a calligraphy class recently; he wants to learn Italic so he can address his son's Bar Mitzvah invitations.

Practical reasons, such as learning to address invitations or cards, making attractive posters, instructing children in more legible writing, are part of the picture,. but many calligraphy students explain their interest by saying that they just love letters and have always doodled with them.

    Unlock more free articles.

Create an account or log in

The craft of calligraphy requires little investment of money ($10 can get one started) and the pleasures are immediate. Writing with a broad edged pen, even if it is not used perfectly at first, can give even a beginner a sense of accomplishment because of the shading and character it lends to any handwriting.

Alfred Fairbanks, a British calligrapher and author of several books on the Italic hand refers to this as “the dance of the pen.” He explains: “How excellent that handwriting can provide an outlet for skill and esthetic feeling, particularly where the ability to draw is lacking. How worthwhile when handwriting interests the writer and pleases the reader. How satisfying when something ordinary and commonplace is raised towards the beautiful.”

While the esthetic appeal is strong, there are many people who get interested in calligraphy simply from a desire to improve their handwriting. Many college students have such bad handwriting that they are required to type their term papers.
Editors’ Picks
Coronavirus and Sex: Questions and Answers
Stop Trying to Be Productive
Staying Sober During a Lockdown

“My handwriting used to be a laugh,” comments Pam Tait, a calligraphy student at the YWCA. “When I sent postcards, people never knew what the message said. This year I felt that my friends would at least know who had sent the Christmas card.”

Lloyd Reynolds, art professor at Reed College and longtime advocate of the use of Italic as a basic script that should be taught in schools, feels illegible handwriting is unnecessary. Through his and others' efforts in Portland, Ore., Italic is now the recognized hand in that city's school curriculum.

Regardless of whether one studies only Italic, or delves more deeply into the history of letters and the structure of various hands, the student of calligraphy can learn more than just letters and design.

The picture writing of Egypt, the Phoenicians' alphabet, and the development in Greece and early Rome of written forms, all show how the alphabet has been shaped to meet various needs. The Roman alphabet, with its classic proportions and purity of form, was well suited to the brush and chisel used for inscribing monuments to the emperors. As the Roman Empire declined, various hands developed; monasteries, each with their own scriptoriums (writing centers) and honored scribes, became pockets of learning and culture as scribes laboriously turned out books and manuscripts by hand.

In Ireland, one of the great calligraphic centers during the seventh and eighth centuries, the penalty for killing a scribe was equal to that for killing a bishop, and it was considered an honor to Saint Patrick that he was considered a good scribe. By the eighth century, Charlemagne was engaged in a reyival of learning and all monasteries were required to maintain a qualified copyist and a scriptorium.

The Carolingian hand, the most widely used style of writing at that time, was followed by various Gothic hands. One of them, the Black Letter or Northern Gothic hand, was developed because it used a more compressed letter which saved space on the vellum that was used for writing—vellum was costly and always in short supply.

Scribes approached their work with a nearly religious fervor because they regarded it as beneficial to the soul—but they too experienced the fatigue which total concentration on calligraphy can cause. In the “Art of Illumination,” authors D'Ancona and Aeschlimann quote one monk from St. Aignan of Orleans who called writing “killing work.” Another monk from the monastery of Corbie evidently labored long and hard over his manuscript: “Dear Reader, In turning over these pages with your fingers, take care not to damage the writing; no one who is not a calligrapher can have any idea of the labour involved. It is as sweet to the copyist to reach his last line as it is to the sailor to reach his port. Three of his fingers hold the reed for writing, but his whole person has painfully to work.

By the 15th century, the chancery cursive, or Italic hand, had come to flower in Italy as Humanist scholars sought out ancient books and manuscripts and developed a hand which would enable them to more rapidly do their copying. However, the development of movable type sounded the death knell for the art of the written hand. It is only in recent decades revived—largely through the efforts of Edward Johnston and Alfred Fairbanks in England, and in this country, of Prof. Arnold Banks at Carnegie‐Mellon University in Pittsburgh.

Today, you don't have to be a monk or scholar (or even an artist) to do calligraphy. For approximately $10 the would‐be calligrapher can equip himself or herself with the basics: a 14x17‐inch pad of bond paper (some teachers suggest graph paper as an aid at first), a hard (6H) pencil, a T‐square for ruling lines, a set of pens and ink.

There are two schools of thought regarding pens—the fountain pen school and the dip‐pen school. The former favor pens such as the Platignum or Osmoroid pen (which come with assorted points and sell for about $5—both available at many art stores). Users of such pens are cautioned to buy water soluble ink because an ink that is labeled “waterproof” contains carbon which will cake in the pen preventing the ink from flowing.

Those who subscribe to the other school of thought frown on the use of fountain pens as instruments for “pen pushers, not calligraphers.” They favor dip pens such as the Mitchell Round Hand Pens, or the Speedball pens. One of these pens, with assorted points, will cost approximately $2.75 for the set. Enthusiasts who favor dip pens claim they give finer thin lines than do the fountain pen points.

Beginning calligraphers are advised to acquire a sloping writing surface, such as an adjustable drafting table; to avoid that expense, they can prop a ‐board up at an angle to form some sort of slanted surface. Frances Manola's students at the Craft Students League I use simple homemade drawing boards approximately 16 by 20 inches in size. These have a hinged piece under the back edge which can be folded down so that the board slopes when rested on a level table. Miss Manola recommends a padded writing surface on the board and for this she folds about six pages of newspaper over chip board with a clean sheet of paper on top, then tapes all sides to make a compact unit. She also suggests that students keep nearby a sheet of paper similar to the one they're working on to test ink flow and strokes, and also a container of water to wash off the pen points when finished. Such care preserves the points.

Students are usually advised to start out by using a large size broad pen point (such as the Speedball B‐4) with which they will naturally make larger, bolder letters, and can more easily spot errors.

At the beginning it is also advisable to draw lines across the paper as a guide. the spacing of these lines being determined by the proportions of the letters. Each type face has certain proportions which the writer must check before starting. The body of a Roman type letter. for example, is five pen widths high, with space for ascenders (the upward strokes on b, d, f, h, and 1) equal to four pen widths, and for descenders (g, p, q, and y) three and one‐half pen widths.

Would ‐ be calligraphers should carefully study the letter forms to discern similarities in shapes and strokes. In the Italic hand, for example, mastering the letter “a” is the key to other similar shaped letters, such as the “d” (which is an “a” plus an “I”), and also to the “g.” “q.” “b” and “p” (both of which are upside down “a's”).

Essential to calligraphy is mastery of the pen itself, especially learning to maintain a constant pen angle. In Italic, for example, the writer must maintain a pen angle of 45 degrees, and should slant letters five to ten degrees off the vertical—Italic letters fit within a slanted oblong parallelogram.

Although most calligraphy students are anxious to learn the Italic hand, some teachers prefer not to teach it as a first hand since it is difficult to learn and should be approached only after one is thoroughly familiar with the pen and has begun to recognize simpler structures. “After all,” says Martin Oberstein, “a person studying medicine wouldn't expect to do brain surgery right off the bat.” Hi his course, Mr. Oberstein, who does lettering for Tiffany's and also teaches at the Calligraphy Workshop, the art students league, and the School of Visual Arts, does not give Italic until after he has taught Roman, Black Letter, and Southern Gothic. Other teachers may concentrate an entire course mainly on Italic since many students are mainly interested in learning that hand.

What is the best way to learn? Formal instruction is easiest in the long run for a student's work is subjected to a critique each week and mistakes are caught before they become incorrect habits. Information supplied and demonstrations given save hours of groping and guessing on the students' part.

Classes at the Calligraphy Workshop (phone: 989‐4664) cost $75 for a 10‐week term, with a new term beginning Jan. 12, 1976. At the Art Students' League (phone: CI 7‐4510), courses cost $5 for initial registration and students can sign up for a month of twice‐a‐week instruction and critique at $40 a month. The Craft Students League in the 53d Street YWCA (phone: 755‐4500) offers a 15‐week session for $75 plus a $12 basic membership, the new term starting on Feb. 2. The course al the New School (phone: 741‐ 5690) costs $105 for a 12week session and the new term starts Feb. 2.

Books can also be useful, although professional calligraphers feel that beginners need some exposure to formal instruction in order to evaluate the how ‐ to ‐ do ‐ it type manuals. There is general agreement on at least three books that should prove helpful. They include: “The First Writing Book”—a facsimile of Arrighi's “La Operina,” translation by Benson. (Yale University Press, $2.25); Edward Johnston's “Writing and Illuminating and Lettering” (Pitman Publishing, $13.50); and Alfred Fairhank's “.A Handwriting Manual” (Watson Guptil Publications, $8.50). Other books some teachers mentioned include: “Humanistic Script of the 15th and 16th Centuries” (Bodlein Library, Oxford, $1): T. Gourdie' “Handwriting for Today” (Pitman Publish;ng, Inc., $3): Byron Macdonald's “Calligraphy, the Art of Lettering with a Broad Pen” (Pentalic Pen Corporation, $3.95); Donald Anderson's “The Art of Written Forms” (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, $6); and Lyold Reynolds “Italic Calligraphy and Handwriting” (Pentalic, $3). Pentalic located at 132 West 22d Street, has a large collection of books, as does Museum Books, 48 West 43d Street. Most well stocked art stores also carry a selection in the field.

Membership in a calligraphy group such as the Society of Scribes (G.P.O. Box 933, New York 10022 (may also be helpful because it keeps members informed of new books, helps to maintain one's commitment to calligraphy, and offers 12 workshops a year on specialized aspects of calligraphy. Membership is $10 per year, with workshops (which fill up quickly) costing $5 each. At present the Society is sponsoring its first exhibition at the Community Museum of Art and Science, Ridgewood and Fairview Avenues, Paramus, N. J. Hours are Wednesday to Saturday, 1 to 5 P.M. and 2 to 6 P.M.

Naturally, no single course, book, one‐day workshop, or visit to a museum will make a person a calligrapher. All are merely starting points. Practice is the key to developing as a calligrapher. “Write a line a day if that's all you have time for,” advises Martin Oberstein, “but write that line well!”

All of which echoes the words of an ancient Persian who wrote thusly on “How to Become a Calligrapher:”

“Oh my heart! It is better cuber to say farewell to writing/And to wash the traces of script off the tablets of the heart/Or to write in a way that people should talk of it/And entreal me for every letter.”