The ancient art has had a modern makeover, garnering millions of fans – including the Duchess of Sussex. And the benefits can be life-changing…

How’s your handwriting these days? When we barely pick up a Biro to jot down a shopping list (why bother when you can tap it out just as speedily on your phone?), you’d be forgiven if your penmanship is a bit below par. But for devotees of modern calligraphy, or lettering as it’s often known, the art of beautiful handwriting is alive and well.
Unlike the trend for adult colouring books (hands up if you have one abandoned on a shelf at home), it takes dedication to master the flowing strokes of modern calligraphy
+8

Unlike the trend for adult colouring books (hands up if you have one abandoned on a shelf at home), it takes dedication to master the flowing strokes of modern calligraphy

More relaxed and freestyle than traditional calligraphy, you’ll spot the artful loops, flicks and flourishes on everything from wedding invitations to the specials board at your local gastro pub. The art form has enjoyed a resurgence in recent months, too. A combination of the ‘Meghan effect’ – national retail chain Hobbycraft reported an incredible 40 per cent spike in calligraphy kit sales last year when it was revealed that the Duchess of Sussex enjoyed the pastime – and a proliferation of modern calligraphy accounts on Instagram, sharing gorgeous, intricate lettering (which are often combined with motivational quotes), has inspired more and more of us to pick up a pen.

Unlike the trend for adult colouring books (hands up if you have one abandoned on a shelf at home), it takes dedication to master the flowing strokes of modern calligraphy. But that’s all part of the joy of it for these five women – who each credit calligraphy with enhancing their lives in very different ways.
Jessica Mickleburgh, 24
+8

Jessica Mickleburgh, 24

‘It has been transformative for my mental health’

Jessica Mickleburgh, 24, is a mental health advocate and budding calligraphy artist. She lives in Devon

I have borderline personality disorder (BPD), which means my moods can be very unstable. I can go from manic to horrendously depressed within a day – I’m up and down like a rollercoaster. It’s as if my emotions are 10,000 times stronger than other people’s.

Three years ago a combination of mental and physical health problems forced me to leave my job as a healthcare assistant. Stuck at home, I needed something other than cuddling my cats to keep myself occupied. As I was scrolling through Facebook, a calligraphy video popped up, which I thought looked fun.

I didn’t have a desk or money to buy workbooks – I just had a pack of Crayola pens – so I taught myself from online videos. Instantly, my days were fuller. Calligraphy gave me something to focus on, which felt really good. Eventually, I saved up and bought more materials; as I practised it got easier.

I now have an Instagram account, @thebpdletterer, where I share my calligraphy progress and discuss my mental health issues. Initially, I wouldn’t post any of my efforts unless they were perfect, but then I saw the hashtag #postitanyway, which encourages you to share your work, even if you’ve spelt something wrong or you don’t like the way one of the letters looks. It doesn’t matter: it just shows that you are human and not a robot.
One of Jessica’s watercolour designs incorporating her lettering skills
+8

One of Jessica’s watercolour designs incorporating her lettering skills
The courses worth signing up for

★ Quill London, run by Lucy Edmonds, Islington, London, quilllondon.com

★ Calligraphy workshops through Olive and Reid, nationwide, oliveandreid.com/events

★ Alice Gabb, London, alicegabb.com/workshops

★ Meticulous Ink, Bath and the Southwest, meticulousink.com/pages/workshop

★ Kirsten Burke, Chichester, kirstenburke.co.uk/workshops

Whenever I post about my BPD alongside my work, people message and comment, thanking me for being so open about it. I’ve made some very close friends through @thebpdletterer – I even met one of them in Canada.

I’ve now got a desk and I practise daily for up to five hours. My plan is to turn calligraphy into some kind of business. It’s early stages, but I’d like to create prints and stickers about mental health. I’m also getting married and I’m already designing our ‘save the date’ cards.

I wouldn’t be in such a strong place mentally if it weren’t for calligraphy. Whenever I do it, I’m in this creative space in my head; nothing has control over me there, my mental health doesn’t control my calligraphy. It’s very freeing, just to sit down, put everything out of my mind and focus on a single word.



Lettering is an extremely mindful hobby. You can’t do it if your brain’s going 200 miles an hour; you need to concentrate. For me, it’s a brilliant distraction from stress. I have two children and I homeschool my 13-year-old son, who is on the autistic spectrum. He is high-functioning but struggles with anxiety, which can be challenging and sometimes dominates family life. Add teenage hormones into the mix and there are occasional meltdowns.

I got into calligraphy three years ago after watching a particularly hypnotic video on Instagram of someone brush-lettering [using a brush pen to create thick and thin strokes]. The benefits have been amazing. Unlike, say, going to the gym, it’s something I can do in my home with my children around. Downtime is incredibly important and this is something just for me. It’s a massive sanity-saver. I’m very much in the moment when I’m doing calligraphy and it leaves me much more relaxed. If I don’t do it regularly, I get antsy, so I squeeze some practice in as much as possible.

It has unlocked a creative side of me. Ever since I got a D in GCSE art, I’ve said to myself, ‘You’re not an artist.’ That’s how it was for the past 30 years, but then I found this outlet and rediscovered my creativity. Modern calligraphy is great if, like me, you haven’t got the patience for all the strict rules of traditional calligraphy.

Since I started, I’ve accumulated a lot of supplies and have completely taken over my husband’s study with all my inks and pens. If I spot a stationery shop when we’re out, my kids always groan, because I have to go in and try out all the pens.
'Since I started, I’ve accumulated a lot of supplies and have completely taken over my husband’s study with all my inks and pens'
+8

'Since I started, I’ve accumulated a lot of supplies and have completely taken over my husband’s study with all my inks and pens'

I like to experiment with different media; I’m hand-lettering stones with little quotes at the moment and leaving them in places for people to find. It’s part of a movement called ‘art abandonment’. I always put my Instagram handle on the back of the stone. Someone found one I’d left on holiday in Devon and tracked me down online. It’s nice to spread a little bit of joy.

The loveliest thing that’s come from my calligraphy is that it has encouraged my son to nurture his own artistic side. He’s very good at drawing, and he’s learnt to turn to it when he’s feeling stressed. So my hobby hasn’t just benefited me, it’s helped him, too. I say ‘hobby’, but it’s so much more than a casual activity you might pick up and drop: for me it’s a total obsession. It brings me so much pleasure.